[Music]
Good day everyone I'm Norman Wildberger and
today we're going to carry on with our course
here in math foundations where we're trying to
orient mathematics in a more sensible and logical
and careful fashion we've been looking in the
last few videos at foundations of analysis and
issues relating to limits and ultimately to the
weaknesses of the real number system which are
very serious weakness having to do with the
the Continuum and the the basic structure on
which calculus and Analysis are based okay so uh
today we're going to be looking at extending the
discussion in our last few videos to the idea
of a limit of a sequence going to Infinity what
does it mean for a sequence to go to infinity
or or to go to minus infinity which is another
possibility that we'll look at all right so
let me just remind you since it has been a
little while of some of the things that we've
been talking about in our last few videos so
one of the things that we've been doing is
talking about the extended rational numbers
where we're augmenting the usual arithmetic with
rational numbers with a new object which we could
call infinity and we did this in a certain way
basically by looking at pairs a b of integers or
Expressions A over B but now without the usual
restriction that b should be non zero so we'll
leave that aside and then we saw that we could
create a viable arithmetic where we have some
new objects appearing in particular 1/ Z which
we denote by this symbol this sort of lnos skate
symbol uh usually call it infinity and we also
saw that well to make this system kind of work
logically and algebraically we also needed to
consider a new kind of object Z over zero which
I denoted uh by this asterisk all right so these
are new kinds of uh symbols that are occurring in
this extended rational numbers which are not
part of the usual rational number system and
I asked uh viewers to give me some suggestions
for what we might call this new object 0 over
Z and I think the best uh suggestion uh was
uh agreed to by quite a few people that uh
we should call it Zas okay so this was a
suggestion of tv10 and so thanks to him or
her and uh so we're going to call this uh new
symbol Zas short for Z over zero all right so
one of the interesting aspects of this new system
is that it allows us to divide by zero okay so U
that's interesting another interesting aspect is
that the notion of equality becomes a little bit
more complicated then for rational numbers so the
expression A over B equals the expression C over
D precisely when we can find nonzero integers
m& n so that m M * a = n * C and M * b = n *
D so this was one way of introducing Infinity
into our number system without having to actually
resorting to believing in something Supernatural
or beyond our capabilities all right so it's not
that I'm suddenly believing in infinite sets
because I don't believe in infinite sets and
neither should you but nevertheless here is a very
finite precise way of introducing something which
we might call Infinity into our arithmetic
so this is certainly one very interesting
aspect or one way of thinking about Infinity
another topic that we discussed is the idea of
a particular kind of sequence and in my opin the
word sequence just like the word function or the
word number is really a metamathematical term
it's not very easy to Define precisely what it
means in a mathematical sense it's easy enough
to give some examples of things that we might
like to be sequences or functions or numbers
but to actually draw a clear fence around the
concept that separates the concept from things
which should not be included is very challenging
and since nobody seems to be able to do that I
prefer to not work with those words in the usual
generality so in my opinion it's much safer to
sort of follow the computer scientists and try to
have more constrained or limited usages of words
in particular I'm quite happy for us to build up
the idea of a sequence sort of slowly slow only
one step at a time by starting with simple-minded
kinds of sequences that we can really nail down
and then maybe a little bit more sophisticated
ones and then a little bit more sophisticated
ones after that and we can leave it sort of as an
open-ended kind of thing we don't have to embrace
the whole concept all at once in fact I think it's
probably dangerous to Aspire to that all right so
our approach for example to discussing sequences
is to restrict ourselves so that we know exactly
what we're we're talking about it that we can all
agree and the kinds of sequences that we are
considering are the ones that are essentially
given by rational functions what I prefer to call
poly numbers it's like a polinomial divided by a
polinomial 1 + alpha s over 2 + 3 Alpha squ
so that's a poly number it's a rational poly
number and Associated to that we can create a
sequence well it's a sequence which I prefer
to write as an on sequence so it's an ongoing
sequence it's not a finite sequence it's something
that keeps on going and the way we generate It
Is by thinking about this particular expression
a bracket then P of n where p is this and then a
pointy bracket okay and we can think about this
thing as being evaluated at K = 1 or k equal
2 and so on if we plug in n = 1 then we get
2 over 5 plug Alpha equal 1 here we get 2 in the
numerator and five in the denominator if we plug
uh alpha or n equal 2 then we get uh 5 over 14 so
by substituting successive natural numbers we can
get a sequence of uh numbers rational numbers and
we can think about this this particular sequence
is being generated by this poly number in other
words we don't really have to actually think
about the sequence itself because the poly number
itself is already a completely finite prescription
of what we think about as the sequence so there's
a distinction here between what we can write down
very concretely namely this expression here and
what we can associate to it in our minds namely
we can think about associating to it this
sequence which keeps on going and going but
ultimately it's not important for us to capture
this sequence because we can work just with the
expression as you know I'm very expression
oriented and this is a way of cutting out all
this chat and discussion and philosophizing just
by concentrating about what we can actually write
down and making sure that we have a consistent and
logical approach to the things that we write down
all right so this is a rational polum on sequence
and officially it's this expression so this is
actually the rational polum on sequence but
if we want to we can evaluate at two and get
5 over 14 if we want all right so this is
a narrow but useful kind of sequence which
allows us to avoid giving a precise definition
of the term sequence in general right so we're
restricting oursel to just this narrow kind of
sequence all right then the next thing that we
did is we talked about limits of rational polum
on sequences so if we have such a rational poly
number on sequence and if a is a rational number
we wanted to Define what this expression means
what it means for the limit as n goes to Infinity
of P of Nal a what does that mean so what does
it mean for the sequence to have the limit 17 or
minus 3 Hales Etc well here's our definition and
it's a novel definition because it's a simpler
kind of concept of what a limit is in fact it's
appreciably simpler than the usual one all right
so we say that this occurs precisely when we can
find two natural numbers K and and M such that
if N is a natural number which is bigger than
or equal to M then these two inequalities are
satisfied the difference between P of N and a
is sandwiched between Min - k/ n and k/ n that's
supposed to be true for all n bigger than or
equal to this starting value n M all right so we
called M the start and we called K the scale so
for example the limit of 1 + n^2 over 2 + 3 n^ 2
as n goes to Infinity is 1/3 let's check why that
is true so in order to establish this we need to
basically check that this condition is satisfied
so ultimately it comes down to finding two numbers
K and M and showing you exactly what they are they
have to be natural numbers like five and 349 most
of the time they're not that complicated they're
usually like one or maybe two but sometimes we
have to use some more complicated numbers but
generally they're pretty simple for at least for
these simple kinds of examples okay so what do
we have to do we have to look at the difference
between the PO number and the limit so here is
1 + n^2 over 2 + 3 n^ 2- A3 and then we're going
to rewrite this take over the common denominator
and then we get 3 * 1 + n^ 2 - 2 + 3 n 2 and the 3
n^ 2 appearing here and the minus 3 n^ 2 appearing
there will cancel and we'll just have 3 - 2 for
a total of 1 so this quantity here simplifies
to this all right so what do we want to do we
want to find K and M so that this quantity is
sandwiched between minus k/n and k/ N okay so now
we uh observe that this quantity here is sandwich
between Min - 1 /n and 1/ N if n is bigger than or
equal to 1 let's see why that's the case so if n
is bigger than or equal to 1 it's a natural number
like 1 or 2 or three then it's obvious that this
inequality is satisfied because this is a negative
number and this is a positive number so yes this
will automatically be bigger than that no problem
why will this be less than or equal to this well
this is equivalent to saying that uh the N is less
than this okay but it's kind of obvious so I think
that if N is a natural number starting with one
that if you take n and you square it multiply it
by three add two and multiply by three you're
getting something that's bigger than or equal
to the number you started with okay so squaring a
number makes it at least as big multiplying it by
three makes it bigger adding two makes it bigger
multiplying by three makes it bigger again so the
denominator here is bigger than the denom at here
so automatically this entire fraction is less than
or equal to this entire fraction so this is a
true statement for all n bigger than or equal to
1 so in this case the K and the N that work are k
equal 1 the numbers that are here in the numerator
just is k equal 1 and the range of values of
n for which this works start with m equals 1
so m is the start so we've exhibited k equal 1
we've exhibited m equal 1 and we've convinced
you hopefully that if n is bigger than or equal
to this m then this inequality will be true and
that proves to us that the limit of this actually
equals this and geometrically what's going on is
that the difference between this thing and this
thing is getting smaller and smaller as n gets
bigger because it's sandwiched between these two
things and they're both getting closer and closer
to zero once N is a th000 then this and this are
just a little bit less and a little bit more than
zero and as n gets bigger and bigger they zero
in or home in on zero so the difference between
these two things becomes smaller and smaller
and smaller closer and closer to zero that's
our intuitive meaning of what the limit means all
right I want to show you a picture of the kind of
um content of that limiting definition this is
a picture I've shown you before but before I do
that I just want to make the note that we are
using this infinity symbol in now a couple of
different ways so we use the infinity symbol in
the extended rational numbers there a particular
algebraic object that we concocted and we're
also using it in this expression it's just sort
of part of the the definition it's meant to imply
the idea that the number n is getting bigger and
bigger that's really the only content of it but
nevertheless we are using the same symbol that
we were using there and so we should note that
these two symbols here are playing different
roles now that's maybe not the best situation
but it's something that we do quite a lot in
mathematics especially when it comes to numbers
the number is zero for example or the number
one uh end up occurring in lots of different
places where they often play the same kind of
role but technically speaking the number one as
a natural number is different from the number
one as a rational number different from one as a
poly number but we often use use the same symbol
because it might get a little bit onerous for us
to always be adjusting our symbol depending on the
domain we're in but maybe strictly speaking we we
should do that okay and if there's any possibility
of confusion we should probably definitely
do that but anyway I want to at least point
out the fact that we may be using this concept
of infinity in a couple of slightly different
ways all right and here's that picture that I
wanted you to uh to make sure you understood so
what does it mean for the limit of a sequence
P of n as n goes to Infinity to be equal to a
number a so here's a sequence's values so P of
n is maybe I don't know minus 2 and here P of
two is maybe one and P of three is maybe four and
maybe you know 3 point something and here are the
various values of P of n marching up and down as
we're going in that direction as and gets larger
and this is supposed to illustrate the idea that
this sequence is somehow getting closer and closer
in terms of its values to this rational number a
whatever it is and the meaning of the inequalities
are that we have these two essentially hyperbolic
branches that are converging to a so there's a
minus K Over N that's sort of that lower branch
and a plus K on N which is that top branch and
K is some scale factor that well if we adjust
it it means that this hyperbola you know gets
a little bit further away or a little bit closer
to the limiting line it just scales it but the
crucial dependen is on N here is n as n is going
in this direction a minus k/ n is approaching a
from the bottom and a plus k n is approaching a
from the top and we're supposing that P of n is
sandwiched between these two after some point it
may not be sandwiched between these two for all
values of n we just require that at some point
given by our starting value M after that point
then P of n does behave and stays within the two
hyperbolic branches that's the picture I want you
to have in mind in terms of a limit of these
rational polum on sequences so what I'd like
to do today is to extend our definition and our
understanding of limit to the idea of the limit
of a sequence being positive infinity or the
limit of the sequence being negative Infinity
I want to Define what that means all right so
we want to Define two more kinds of behavior
for a rational Pol number on sequence terms of
limiting Behavior as the N gets large okay and
the examples that illustrate what we want to have
happen are these so the limit of the sequence N
squared that's a sequence 1 4 9 16 and so on as
n gets bigger and bigger the square gets bigger
and bigger and it gets bigger without any any
limit so we're going to want that the limit of
n^2 as n goes to infinity is infinity and we'll
write plus infinity or positive Infinity here
we're going to do that to distinguish it from
minus infinity and also to help us distinguish
this Infinity from the infinity that occurred
in the extended rational numbers which doesn't
have a sign and which treats plus infinity and
minus infinity as the same essentially so it's
a different kind of use of infinity related
but somewhat different another example 1 + n
Cub over 2 + n now as n gets big well 1 + n Cub
is going to get big but so is 2 plus n they're
both going to get big but the quotient is going
to get big because n cubed sort of the dominant
term here is much bigger than n once n gets
large so we do expect that the limit of this
should also be plus infinity and here we have
the limit of 2 - n 4 over 1 + N - n^ 2 okay the
way we think about this is that for n very very
large basically the minus n the 4th term in the
numerator dominates and the minus n^ 2 term in
the denominator dominates so basically this is
sort of like- N 4/ - n^ 2 which is a lot like n^2
so it really behaves a little bit like this one
and its limit should be plus infinity examples of
when we have a limit going to minus infinity here
will be one 1 + n^2 over 3 - 4n if you plug in a
very big value of n like N is a million then this
number is a very large negative number it's not
a big positive number it's a big negative number
similarly n Cub over- n^ 2 the N Cub dominates
the n^2 so it's big but there's a minus sign
floating around here so we're actually going to
go down to minus infinity and here again there's
a minus sign and the numerator is an N to the 8
and here we have 100 + 99 n 5th these are a little
bit big numbers but the N to the8 dominates
uh this denominator so the result is that the
thing is going to go to inity but going to go to
negative Infinity um because of that minus sign
and you can see that by imagining what you get
when you plug in n equals a TH or a million or
something biggish number then you're going to see
that this is going to be a large negative number
so what we want to do is we want to Define what
these things mean we have an intuitive idea of
what it should mean now we want to say it so
precisely and clearly that everybody can use
this terminology without any misunderstandings
or ambiguities right that's our aim all right
so let's have a look at our definition if P of N
is a rational poly number on sequence then this
namely the limit as n goes to Infinity of P of n
equals plus infinity that means the following it
means that we can find K and M natural numbers
as just as before such that if n is bigger than
or equal to M that's just as before then this
inequality holes that n / K is less than or
equal to P of n or in other words that P of n is
bigger than or equal to this multiple of n n / k
that sort of makes sense I hope that I mean if P
of n is in fact bigger than n / K maybe K is 12
so if we can prove that P of n is bigger than or
equal to n/ 12 at least once n gets to a certain
point then n/2 is going to go up and up and up
as n gets large and if P of n is bigger than
n/2 well then P of n will also have to go up and
so it deserves to be going to plus infinity all
right and what about the definition the limit as
n goes to Infinity of P of n equals minus infinity
that means we can find K and M natural numbers
so that if n is bigger than or equal to M then
now P of n is less than or equal to - n / K again
it's n divided by some natural number maybe like
12 but we have a minus sign here so what would
it be if say p of n is less than or equal to - n
/2 well as n gets big minus n /2 is going
to get big in a negative way it's become a
large negative number and if P of n is less
than or equal to that large negative number
it means that it's also a large negative number
so as this goes down down down in size more and
more negative well this is also going to be
forced to go down in size so this is going
to be heading off towards minus infinity so this
deserves to be also called so it makes sense to
say that this is also heading to minus infinity
and I just point out again that these terms plus
infinity and minus infinity that that are
on the right hand side here are different
usages from the infinity that we defined when
we were talking about the extended rational
numbers it's a different kind of meaning and
I'm hoping that this plus sign and the minus
sign that we put in front of things
make it uh more clear that that's the
case let's have a look at some examples we're
kind of moving in the direction of analysis
here so the arguments that I'm going to present
here are relatively simple kinds of arguments
that would does in an introductory analysis
course so for those of you who haven't taken
that maybe it's been a while since you've taken
calculus don't worry too much if the details um
maybe are a little bit complicated or maybe
a little bit unfamiliar we're not going to
be going too far in this direction I just want
to show you sort of how the story goes and that
if you worked at it you could um completely
Master this relatively simple-minded way of
thinking about limits okay so an example
here we have a situation where we have a
limit going to plus infinity the limit of 1 + n
Cub / 2 + n = + infinity let's explain why that
is all right so the kind of inequality that
we want to establish is that this thing here
is bigger than or equal to n / k for some
appropriately chosen K and for all n past
some point M so this is the kind of inequality
that we have to establish so let's just look at
this inequality and we going observe that this
thing is equivalent to this so how did I go from
here to here well I multiplied both sides by
2 + n okay now when you have a inequality you
multiply both sides by something you have to
make sure that what you're multiplying by is
positive otherwise the inequality will change but
if N is a natural number which is the domain in
which we're considering things then 2 plus n is
always positive and so multiplying both sides by
2+ n is not going to change this inequality okay
then we're going to get 2 + n * n or 2 n + n^2
/ K and we're going to want to establish that
this is less than or equal to 1 + n cubed for
all n bigger than or equal to something so we
have to ask well what K can we choose well we
have some Freedom here uh and in fact it it works
if we just let k equals 1 so let's suppose that
k equals 1 then this becomes the inequality um
0 is less than or equal to 1 - 2 N - n^ 2 + n
Cub so if K is equal to one then I'm rewriting
this inequality by bringing everything to the
right hand side so basically I have to prove
that this is always positive and we wanted to
prove that it's always positive for n past
some point okay we don't require that it's
true for all n but just that there's some M so
that once we're past M then it's true all right
so I claim this is valid when n is bigger than or
equal to two this is the case when m is equal to
two how can we see that this quantity is bigger
than or equal to zero when n is bigger than or
equal to 2 well one way if you know a little
bit about graphing pols okay this is a cubic
polinomial poly number we can graph it at least
approximately and I hope this is somewhat familiar
right this a cubic kind of polum so it has
that kind of shape and we can see that well
eventually it gets positive and looking at the
graph when n is bigger than or equal to two then
yes indeed the value of the number is bigger
than equal to Z it's not bigger than equal to
Z for example at 1 if you plug Nal 1 you get 1
- 2 - 1 + 1 that's minus one it's not true when
n is 1 but it is true when n is two example if
you plug two in you get 1 - 4 - 4 + 8 which is
positive and we can claim that this is going to
be true for all n bigger than or equal to 2 so
one way of seeing this algebraically is to look
at this and rewrite it in this way to write it
as n^2 - 2 * N - 1 and I got that by taking the
n^ 2 * n that gives us an N cubed I also want a
minus n^ 2 so I'm going to put a minus one here
that'll give us A- n^ 2 and I want - 2 N so put
a min-2 here that'll give us - 2 N and Al together
then what's left over I have to have one so right
now I have plus 2 so if I subtract one then it's
all balanced if we write it this way then we can
see that if n is bigger than or equal to 2 then
this is going to be bigger than or equal to 1
and this is going to be bigger than or equal
to 4 - 2 which is 2 so in all of these cases
this is bigger than or equal to 2 * 1 - 1 which
is uh 1 so it's bigger than or equal to zero
so one way or the other we convince ourselves that
yes this inequality is true if n is bigger than or
equal to 2 and if K is equal to 1 so with K = 1
and M = 2 then n bigger than equal to 2 implies
that this basic inequality is satisfied and
so the limit of this thing really is positive
Infinity so at the end of this calculation I can
give you these certificates I can say here is K
it's equal to one have a look right there and here
is m equal 2 here it is right there I'm showing
you these two numbers and these two numbers
are certificates for the inequality that we
want to establish it's a finite process that's the
critical thing we only have to do a finite amount
of stuff that's good because we're not capable
of doing an infinite amount of stuff at least
I'm not all right so here's an example limit as n
goes to Infinity of 1 + n^2 / 3 - 4n claim that's
equal to minus infinity okay so what do we have
to observe all right so how do we establish that
here is the basic inequality from the definition
we have to show that this thing here is less than
or equal to - n / k for some K natural number and
and once n gets past some point M also a natural
number so this should be true for all n past M
and you get to choose where you want to start
so let's simplify this first by say multiplying
by this 3 - 4n which is in the denominator here
so I multiply that over here and I get - 3 n
+ 4 n 2 there over K but notice that this less
than or equal sign has changed to a greater
than or equal sign why is that well because
the thing that I've multiplied by is in fact
going to be negative because the n's that I'm
considering are all bigger than or equal to one
if n is bigger than or equal to 1 then 3 - 4n is
necessarily negative so when we're multiplying
by that negative quantity the inequality sign
has to change that's why there's a greater than
or equal to sign there not a less than or equal
to okay so now we have to choose a value of
K so that we can establish this inequality
for some reasonable range of ends starting
somewhere one convenient thing to do is to
set k equal 4 because then there will
be cancellation with this four here and
then then this N2 here will cancel with that n
Square there things will become a lot simpler
so if k equal 4 then this inequality becomes
just 1 is greater than or equal to - 3 n /
4 when is this thing valid well this is valid
whenever n is bigger than or equal to 1 because
there's a negative sign here N is a natural
number bigger than or equal to 1 then - 3 n
over 4 is going to be certainly less than or
equal to 1 conclusion if we choose k = 4 and
m equal 1 then if little n is bigger than
or equal to M then this basic inequality
is satisfied which proves to us that the
limit is minus infinity and again I have
certificates the certificates here are the
scale is K = 4 and the starting point is m = 1
I can show you those that I've done the right
work and then you can check the inequality is
true all right very good there's a whole bunch
of other things we could do now if we were sort
of doing an analysis course but we're not doing
that we're just interested in investigating the
foundations and getting enough understanding of
what a limit is in order to be able to understand
some of the difficulties with the current theory
of real numbers and then once we get to some other
aspects of analysis this will uh come back
uh be a good help for us as well so in our
next video we're going to to have a look at the
standard usage of the word limit in Modern Age
It's usually considered a great accomplishment
that the late 19th century mathematicians had
a so-called rigorous understanding of the limit
process and the usual story is that V stas and
Koshi and so on ascended to a much greater height
than Oiler and Newton ever had because of this
all important definition this is a story that I
would like to differ with okay in my opinion the
standard definition of a limit that you find
in all calculus and Analysis text is in fact
logically very weak it's logically problematic
and in our next video I'm going to explain to
you exactly why so it's going to be another
video that it's going to be a little bit uh
difficult for students who are being trained in
the current system to to deal with but you can
have a scientific approach and see whether I'm
actually right and whether you will agree with
me be very interesting so I hope you'll join me
for that I'm Norman wildberger thanks for [Music]
listening a